Code for identifying influential sequence elements affecting Translational Efficiency in Histoplasma capsulatum and for creating machine learning models to predict protein production.
<br>
<br> Paper In Proceedings of International Young Researcher’s Conference Fall 2021. Columbia University, NY. [[Link]](https://past.the-iyrc.org/annika-viswesh.html) (Oral Presentation)
<h3 align="center">Abstract</h3>
<h3 align="center">Investigating the Sequence Elements that Affect the Translation Efficiency of the Fungal Pathogen Histoplasma Capsulatum</h3> 
<br>Histoplasmosis disease is caused by the dimorphic switch of the Histoplasma capsulatum fungus. Predicting the Translational Efficiency (TE) for Histoplasma capsulatum will lead to techniques that can regulate its protein production and thereby help in the treatment of Histoplasmosis. However, what sequence elements in the mRNA determine TE in Histoplasma is not well understood. The 5' Untranslated region (UTR) of 4981 genes common to 4 strains of Histoplasma were explored to identify the correlation between the longest 5 Upstream Open Reading Frame (uORFs) with start codon ATG, length of the 5' UTR, the energy of constrained secondary RNA structure, CG-to-ATG ratio and TE, using Wilcoxon tests, normal distribution plots, and Area under the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve. Subsequently, using all these sequence elements as features, four computational models were developed using different machine learning algorithms to predict TE. The results demonstrate that the maximum length of uORF with start codon ATG and the CG-to-ATG ratio have the best correlation to TE with the highest Area Under the Curve (AUC) amongst all sequence elements at 0.74 and 0.79, respectively. Also, the computational model created using Random Forest outperformed other models to best predict TE with an AUC of 0.85. This research helped identify a set of sequence elements that affect TE in Histoplasma capsulatum and also showed that computational models can be created for predicting the TE of Histoplasma.
